spec/1_tiled_gridded_elevation_data.adoc, before:

[[tiled_gridded_elevation_data]]
== Tiled Gridded Elevation Data Extension (Normative)

=== Extension Title

Tiled Gridded Elevation Data

=== Introduction

The GeoPackage Standards Working Group (SWG) has identified a need for the ability to store tiled gridded elevation data in a GeoPackage. This capability will be used to support use cases such as the following:

*	Visualization
**	2D (hillshade, color relief, slope)
**	3D (supporting changing view angles and level of detail)
*	Analysis
**	Viewshed and line-of-sight
** Cross-country mobility (off-road routing)
** Site suitability and planning (slope analysis such as helicopter landing zones)
** 3D geometry representations of features (ground-based, airspace)
**	Terrain association (associating images to mapped locations)
**	Augmented reality training

:elevation_precision: footnote:[We acknowledge that this approach will not support certain applications that require a high degree of precision and/or accuracy (e.g., targeting).]
This extension to the OGC GeoPackage Encoding Standard leverages the existing structure for raster tiles using PNG files as the container for the elevation values themselves.
This capability was designed to be relatively easy to implement and to be suitable for a wide variety of computing environments including the mobile/handheld computing environment{elevation_precision}.

=== Extension Author

GeoPackage SWG, author_name `gpkg`.

=== Extension Name or Template

`gpkg_elevation_tiles`

=== Extension Type

New requirement dependent on http://www.geopackage.org/spec/#tiles[Clause 2.2].

=== Applicability

This extension applies to http://www.geopackage.org/spec/#tiles_user_tables[tile pyramid user data tables] that are used to hold tiled, gridded elevation data.

=== Scope

read-write

=== Requirements

==== Table Definitions
[[coverage_ancillary]]
===== Coverage Ancillary
[requirement] A GeoPackage that contains tiled gridded elevation data SHALL contain a `gpkg_2D_gridded_coverage_ancillary` table or view as per <<gpkg_2D_gridded_coverage_ancillary_table>>.
Subsequent extensions or custom implementations MAY add additional columns to this table.
Clients SHALL ignore additional columns that are unrecognized.

:real_value: footnote:[This is a REAL to support extensions that use non-integer data.]
[[gpkg_2D_gridded_coverage_ancillary_table]]
.Coverage Ancillary Table Definition
[cols=",,,,,",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Column Name |Column Type |Column Description |Null |Default |Key
|`id`|INTEGER	|Autoincrement primary key|no||PK
|`tile_matrix_set_id`|INTEGER|Foreign key to `id` in http://www.geopackage.org/spec/#tile_matrix_set_data_table_definition)[`gpkg_tile_matrix_set`]|no||FK
|`datatype`|TEXT	|'integer'|no||
|`uom`|TEXT|unit of measure, as per UCUM<<2>>|no||
|`scale`|REAL|Scale as a multiple relative to the unit of measure|yes|1|
|`offset`|REAL|The offset to the 0 value|yes|0|
|`precision`|REAL{real_value}|The smallest value that has meaning for this dataset|yes|1|
|`data_null`|REAL{real_value}|The value that indicates NULL|yes||
|`data_missing`|REAL{real_value}|The value that indicates data is missing|yes||
|=======================================================================

===== Tile Ancillary
[requirement] A GeoPackage that contains tiled gridded elevation data SHALL contain a `gpkg_2D_gridded_tile_ancillary` table or view as per <<gpkg_2D_gridded_tile_ancillary_table>>.
Subsequent extensions or custom implementations MAY add additional columns to this table.
Clients SHALL ignore additional columns that are unrecognized.

[[gpkg_2D_gridded_tile_ancillary_table]]
.Tile Ancillary Table Definition
[cols=",,,,,",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Column Name |Column Type |Column Description |Null |Key
|`id`|INTEGER	|Autoincrement primary key|no|PK
|`tpudt_name`|TEXT	|Name of http://www.geopackage.org/spec/#tiles_user_tables[tile pyramid user data table]|no|unique
|`tpudt_id`|INTEGER	|Foreign key to `id` in http://www.geopackage.org/spec/#tiles_user_tables[tile pyramid user data table]|no|unique
|`min`|REAL{real_value}|Minimum value of this tile|yes|
|`max`|REAL{real_value}|Maximum value of this tile|yes|
|`mean`|REAL|The arithmetic mean of values in this tile|yes|
|`std_dev`|REAL|The standard deviation of values in this tile|yes|
|=======================================================================

==== Table Values
===== `gpkg_contents`
:vertical_datum: footnote:[Ideally the vertical datum for each pyramid of elevation will be specified. However, it is impractical to mandate this for a number of reasons, including the difficulty in testing whether a specific SRS has a valid vertical datum.]
[requirement] (extends http://www.geopackage.org/spec/#_requirement-34[GPKG-34]) The http://www.geopackage.org/spec/#_contents[`gpkg_contents`] table SHALL contain a row with a `data_type` column value of `2D-gridded-coverage` for each tile pyramid containing tiled gridded elevation data. The `srs_id` column value for that row SHOULD reference an SRS that has a vertical datum{vertical_datum}.

===== `gpkg_extensions`
[requirement] GeoPackages complying with this extension SHALL have a row in the `gpkg_extensions` table as described in <<gpkg_extensions_records>>:

:naming_authority: footnote:[Pending OGC naming authority decision.]
[[gpkg_extensions_records]]
.Extensions Table Record
[cols=",,,",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|`table_name`|`column_name`|`extension_name`|`definition`|`scope`
|null|null|`gpkg_elevation_tiles`|TBD {naming_authority}|'read-write'
|=======================================================================

===== `gpkg_2D_gridded_coverage_ancillary`
The following requirements refer to the `gpkg_2D_gridded_coverage_ancillary` table as per <<gpkg_2D_gridded_coverage_ancillary_table>>.

[requirement] Values of the `tile_matrix_set_id` column SHALL reference values in the `gpkg_tile_matrix_set` `id` column.

[requirement] Values of the `datatype` column SHALL be 'integer'.

===== `gpkg_2D_gridded_tile_ancillary`
The following requirements refer to the `gpkg_2D_gridded_tile_ancillary` table as per <<gpkg_2D_gridded_tile_ancillary_table>>.

[requirement] Values of the `tpudt_name` column SHALL reference existing http://www.geopackage.org/spec/#tiles_user_tables[tile pyramid user data tables].

[requirement] Values of the `tpudt_id` column SHALL reference values in `id` column of the table referenced in `tpudt_name`.

===== Tile Pyramid User Data Tables
[requirement] The `tile_data` BLOB in the http://www.geopackage.org/spec/#tiles_user_tables[tile pyramid user data table] containing tiled, gridded elevation data SHALL be of MIME type `image/png` and the data SHALL be 16-bit grayscale.

=== Table Definition SQL

TBD

=== References

==== Normative References (Normative)

The following normative documents contain provisions which, through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this document.
For dated references, subsequent amendments to, or revisions of, any of these publications do not apply.
However, parties to agreements based on this part of this document are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the normative documents indicated below.
For undated references, the latest edition of the normative document referred to applies.

[bibliography]
- [[[1]]] http://www.geopackage.org/spec[OGC 12-128r10 OGC® GeoPackage Encoding Standard (On-line)]
- [[[1a]]] https://portal.opengeospatial.org/files/?artifact_id=56357[OGC 12-128r10 OGC® GeoPackage Encoding Standard (PDF)]
- [[[2]]] http://unitsofmeasure.org/ucum.html[The Unified Code for Units of Measure (UCUM)]

Commit message:

clarifying rules for scale and offset

spec/1_tiled_gridded_elevation_data.adoc, after:

[[tiled_gridded_elevation_data]]
== Tiled Gridded Elevation Data Extension (Normative)

=== Extension Title

Tiled Gridded Elevation Data

=== Introduction

The GeoPackage Standards Working Group (SWG) has identified a need for the ability to store tiled gridded elevation data in a GeoPackage. This capability will be used to support use cases such as the following:

*	Visualization
**	2D (hillshade, color relief, slope)
**	3D (supporting changing view angles and level of detail)
*	Analysis
**	Viewshed and line-of-sight
** Cross-country mobility (off-road routing)
** Site suitability and planning (slope analysis such as helicopter landing zones)
** 3D geometry representations of features (ground-based, airspace)
**	Terrain association (associating images to mapped locations)
**	Augmented reality training

:elevation_precision: footnote:[We acknowledge that this approach will not support certain applications that require a high degree of precision and/or accuracy (e.g., targeting).]
This extension to the OGC GeoPackage Encoding Standard leverages the existing structure for raster tiles using PNG files as the container for the elevation values themselves.
This capability was designed to be relatively easy to implement and to be suitable for a wide variety of computing environments including the mobile/handheld computing environment{elevation_precision}.

=== Extension Author

GeoPackage SWG, author_name `gpkg`.

=== Extension Name or Template

`gpkg_elevation_tiles`

=== Extension Type

New requirement dependent on http://www.geopackage.org/spec/#tiles[Clause 2.2].

=== Applicability

This extension applies to http://www.geopackage.org/spec/#tiles_user_tables[tile pyramid user data tables] that are used to hold tiled, gridded elevation data.

=== Scope

read-write

=== Requirements

==== Table Definitions
[[coverage_ancillary]]
===== Coverage Ancillary
[requirement] A GeoPackage that contains tiled gridded elevation data SHALL contain a `gpkg_2D_gridded_coverage_ancillary` table or view as per <<gpkg_2D_gridded_coverage_ancillary_table>>.
Subsequent extensions or custom implementations MAY add additional columns to this table.
Clients SHALL ignore additional columns that are unrecognized.

:real_value: footnote:[This is a REAL to support extensions that use non-integer data.]
[[gpkg_2D_gridded_coverage_ancillary_table]]
.Coverage Ancillary Table Definition
[cols=",,,,,",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Column Name |Column Type |Column Description |Null |Default |Key
|`id`|INTEGER	|Autoincrement primary key|no||PK
|`tile_matrix_set_id`|INTEGER|Foreign key to `id` in http://www.geopackage.org/spec/#tile_matrix_set_data_table_definition)[`gpkg_tile_matrix_set`]|no||FK
|`datatype`|TEXT	|'integer'|no||
|`uom`|TEXT|unit of measure, as per UCUM<<2>>|no||
|`scale`|REAL|Scale as a multiple relative to the unit of measure|yes|1|
|`offset`|REAL|The offset to the 0 value|yes|0|
|`precision`|REAL{real_value}|The smallest value that has meaning for this dataset|yes|1|
|`data_null`|REAL{real_value}|The value that indicates NULL|yes||
|`data_missing`|REAL{real_value}|The value that indicates data is missing|yes||
|=======================================================================
[requirement] Integer elevation values MAY be scaled and offset in order to make more efficient use of 16-bit integer space available in PNG files. Actual elevation values SHALL be calculated by multiplying the stored value by the `scale` and then adding the `offset`.

===== Tile Ancillary
[requirement] A GeoPackage that contains tiled gridded elevation data SHALL contain a `gpkg_2D_gridded_tile_ancillary` table or view as per <<gpkg_2D_gridded_tile_ancillary_table>>.
Subsequent extensions or custom implementations MAY add additional columns to this table.
Clients SHALL ignore additional columns that are unrecognized.

[[gpkg_2D_gridded_tile_ancillary_table]]
.Tile Ancillary Table Definition
[cols=",,,,,",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Column Name |Column Type |Column Description |Null |Key
|`id`|INTEGER	|Autoincrement primary key|no|PK
|`tpudt_name`|TEXT	|Name of http://www.geopackage.org/spec/#tiles_user_tables[tile pyramid user data table]|no|unique
|`tpudt_id`|INTEGER	|Foreign key to `id` in http://www.geopackage.org/spec/#tiles_user_tables[tile pyramid user data table]|no|unique
|`min`|REAL{real_value}|Minimum value of this tile|yes|
|`max`|REAL{real_value}|Maximum value of this tile|yes|
|`mean`|REAL|The arithmetic mean of values in this tile|yes|
|`std_dev`|REAL|The standard deviation of values in this tile|yes|
|=======================================================================

[requirement] The `min`, `max`, and `mean` values SHALL be natural, i.e., not scaled or offset. Similarly, the `std_dev` SHALL be calculated based on the natural values.

==== Table Values
===== `gpkg_contents`
:vertical_datum: footnote:[Ideally the vertical datum for each pyramid of elevation will be specified. However, it is impractical to mandate this for a number of reasons, including the difficulty in testing whether a specific SRS has a valid vertical datum.]
[requirement] (extends http://www.geopackage.org/spec/#_requirement-34[GPKG-34]) The http://www.geopackage.org/spec/#_contents[`gpkg_contents`] table SHALL contain a row with a `data_type` column value of `2D-gridded-coverage` for each tile pyramid containing tiled gridded elevation data. The `srs_id` column value for that row SHOULD reference an SRS that has a vertical datum{vertical_datum}.

===== `gpkg_extensions`
[requirement] GeoPackages complying with this extension SHALL have a row in the `gpkg_extensions` table as described in <<gpkg_extensions_records>>:

:naming_authority: footnote:[Pending OGC naming authority decision.]
[[gpkg_extensions_records]]
.Extensions Table Record
[cols=",,,",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|`table_name`|`column_name`|`extension_name`|`definition`|`scope`
|null|null|`gpkg_elevation_tiles`|TBD {naming_authority}|'read-write'
|=======================================================================

===== `gpkg_2D_gridded_coverage_ancillary`
The following requirements refer to the `gpkg_2D_gridded_coverage_ancillary` table as per <<gpkg_2D_gridded_coverage_ancillary_table>>.

[requirement] Values of the `tile_matrix_set_id` column SHALL reference values in the `gpkg_tile_matrix_set` `id` column.

[requirement] Values of the `datatype` column SHALL be 'integer'.

===== `gpkg_2D_gridded_tile_ancillary`
The following requirements refer to the `gpkg_2D_gridded_tile_ancillary` table as per <<gpkg_2D_gridded_tile_ancillary_table>>.

[requirement] Values of the `tpudt_name` column SHALL reference existing http://www.geopackage.org/spec/#tiles_user_tables[tile pyramid user data tables].

[requirement] Values of the `tpudt_id` column SHALL reference values in `id` column of the table referenced in `tpudt_name`.

===== Tile Pyramid User Data Tables
[requirement] The `tile_data` BLOB in the http://www.geopackage.org/spec/#tiles_user_tables[tile pyramid user data table] containing tiled, gridded elevation data SHALL be of MIME type `image/png` and the data SHALL be 16-bit grayscale.

=== Table Definition SQL

TBD

=== References

==== Normative References (Normative)

The following normative documents contain provisions which, through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this document.
For dated references, subsequent amendments to, or revisions of, any of these publications do not apply.
However, parties to agreements based on this part of this document are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the normative documents indicated below.
For undated references, the latest edition of the normative document referred to applies.

[bibliography]
- [[[1]]] http://www.geopackage.org/spec[OGC 12-128r10 OGC® GeoPackage Encoding Standard (On-line)]
- [[[1a]]] https://portal.opengeospatial.org/files/?artifact_id=56357[OGC 12-128r10 OGC® GeoPackage Encoding Standard (PDF)]
- [[[2]]] http://unitsofmeasure.org/ucum.html[The Unified Code for Units of Measure (UCUM)]
